---
head:
  - - link
    - rel: stylesheet
      type: text/css
      href: /rengm/styles/ecma2021.css
---

[[toc]]

## 1. scope 范围

标准定义 ECMA2021 普遍性编程语言

## 2. conformance 一致性声明

::: tip 原文
A conforming implementation of ECMAScript must provide and support all the types, values, objects, properties,
functions, and program syntax and semantics described in this specification.
:::
ECMA 的一致性实现包括提供和实现所有的类型，值，对象，属性，函数，以及规范中描述的程序的语义和语法

::: tip 原文
A conforming implementation of ECMAScript may provide additional types, values, objects, properties, and functions
beyond those described in this specification.
:::

ECMA 的一致性实现可能提供超前本规范描述的新增的类型，值，对象，属性和函数。

## 3. Normative References 规范性参考

ECMA 402 ECMA 2015 international API specification ES6 国际化 API 规范 <br/>
ECMA 404 The JSON Data Interchange Format. JSON 数据交换格式

## 4. Overview 概述

::: tip 摘抄
ECMAScript is now a fully featured general-purpose programming language.
:::
ECMA 现在已经是一门功能齐全的通用型编程语言

### 4.1 Web Script

::: tip 原文
A web browser provides an ECMAScript host environment for client-side computation including, for instance, objects
that represent windows, menus, pop-ups, dialog boxes, text areas, anchors, frames, history, cookies, and
input/output. Further, the host environment provides a means to attach scripting code to events such as change of
focus, page and image loading, unloading, error and abort, selection, form submission, and mouse actions. Scripting
code appears within the HTML and the displayed page is a combination of user interface elements and fixed and
computed text and images. The scripting code is reactive to user interaction, and there is no need for a main program.<br/>
A web server provides a different host environment for server-side computation including objects representing
requests, clients, and files; and mechanisms to lock and share data. By using browser-side and server-side scripting
together, it is possible to distribute computation between the client and server while providing a customized user
interface for a Web-based application.<br/>

  <div class="tip-aqua">Each Web browser and server that supports ECMAScript supplies its own host environment, completing the
ECMAScript execution environment.</div>
:::
<div class="tip-aqua">每个支持ECMA的web浏览器和服务器都提供其自身的宿主环境，完成ECMA执行环境</div>

### 4.2 hosts and implementations

::: tip 原文
To aid integrating ECMAScript into host environments, this specification defers the definition of certain facilities (e.g.,
abstract operations), either in whole or in part, to a source outside of this specification. Editorially, this specification
distinguishes the following kinds of deferrals
:::
为了将 ECMA 整合到宿主环境，本规范推迟了部分整体和局部的争对本规范外的 Source 的功能(facilities)的定义(比如抽象操作)。社论上，本规范区分为以下几种"推迟"

::: tip defferrals
An `implementation` is an external source that further defines facilities enumerated in Annex D or those that are marked as implementation-defined or implementation-approximated. In informal use, an implementation refers to a concrete artefact, such as a particular web browser.<br/>
An `implementation-defined facility` is one defers its definition to an external source without further qualification.This specification does not make any recommendations for particular behaviours, and conforming implementations are free to choose any behaviour within the constraints put forth by this specification.<br/>
An `implementation-approximated facility` is one defers its definition to an external source while recommending an ideal behaviour. While conforming implementations are free to choose any behaviour within the constraints put forth by this specification, they are encouraged to strive to approximate the ideal. Some mathematical operations, such as Math.exp, are implementation-approximated.<br/>
A `host` is an external source that further defines facilities listed in Annex D but does not further define other implementation-defined or implementation-approximated facilities. In informal use, a host refers to the set of all implementations, such as the set of all web browsers, that interface with this specification in the same way via AnnexD. A host is often an external specification, such as WHATWG HTML (https://html.spec.whatwg.org/). In other words, facilities that are host-defined are often further defined in external specifications.<br/>
A `host hook` is an abstract operation that is defined in whole or in part by an external source. All host hooks must be listed in Annex D.<br/>
A `host-defined facility` is one defers its definition to an external source without further qualification and is listed in Annex D. Implementations that are not hosts may also provide definitions for host-defined facilities.<br/>
A `host environment` is a particular choice of definition for all host-defined facilities. A host environment typically includes objects or functions which allow obtaining input and providing output as host-defined properties of the global object
:::
implementation 执行
approximated 近似的<br/>
"近似执行"，一些数学的操作，比如 Math.exp，就是近似执行<br/>
informal 非正式的
facilities 实现<br/>

#### 4.2.1 HOST Hooks

- HostCallJobCallBack(callback,V,argumentList)
  let hosts restore state when invoking JavaScript callbacks from inside tasks
- HostEnqueuePromiseJob(job,realm)
  ...

### 4.3 ECMAScript Overview

::: tip 摘抄
ECMAScript is object-basic ... an ECMAScript program is a cluster of communicating objects<br/>

<div class="tip-aqua">
A primitive value is a member of one of the following built-in types: Undefined, Null, Boolean, Number, BigInt, String, and Symbol; an object is a member of the built-in type Object; and a function is a callable object. A function that is associated with an object via a property is called a method.
</div>
ECMAScript also defines a set of built-in operators. ECMAScript operators include various unary operations,
multiplicative operators, additive operators, bitwise shift operators, relational operators, equality operators, binary
4.3 ECMAScript Overview 49 bitwise operators, binary logical operators, assignment operators, and the comma operator.<br/>
:::

resemble 类似<br/>
ECMAScript syntax intentionally resembles Java Syntax

#### 4.3.1 Object

new Date(2009,11)

<p class="tip-aqua">{{new Date(2009,11)}}</p>
Date()
<p class="tip-aqua">{{Date()}}</p>

::: warning constructor
Invoking a constructor without using new has consequences that depend on the constructor
:::
调用构造函数而不使用 new 的结果取决于构造函数

::: tip about prototype chain
Every object created by a constructor has an implicit reference (called the object's prototype) to the value of its
constructor's "prototype" property. Furthermore, a prototype may have a non-null implicit reference to its prototype,
and so on; this is called the prototype chain.

<p class="tip-aqua"> When a reference is made to a property in an object, that reference is to the
property of that name in the first object in the prototype chain that contains a property of that name. 
</p>
In other words,first the object mentioned directly is examined for such a property; if that object contains the named property, that is
the property to which the reference refers; if that object does not contain the named property, the prototype for that
object is examined next; and so on.
:::
构造函数创建的对象与构造函数的prototype属性的值包含一种隐式引用（被称之为对象的原型）。
<p class="tip-aqua">
对一个对象属性的引用，其实就是引用原型链中包含该属性的第一个对象中该对象属性的名称
</p>

#### 4.3.2 the strict variant of ECMAScript

::: tip 解释
The strict variant of the language excludes some specific syntactic and semantic features of the regular ECMAScript language and modifies the detailed semantics of
some features.
:::

::: tip 规范
In addition,an implementation must support the combination of unrestricted and strict mode source text units into a single composite program.
:::
严格模式和非严格模式的单元测试都要通过

### 4.4 terms and definitions

#### 4.4.1 implementation-approximated

#### 4.4.2 implementation-defined

#### 4.4.3 host-defined

#### 4.4.4 type

#### 4.4.5 primitive type

#### 4.4.6 object

#### 4.4.7 constructor

#### 4.4.8 prototype

#### 4.4.9 ordinary object 普通对象

#### 4.4.10 exotic object 外来对象

不完全拥有所有对象的内置方法
::: tip 声明
Any object that is not an ordinary object is an exotic object.
:::

#### 4.4.11 standard object 标准对象

object whose semantics are defined by this specification

#### built-in object

object specified and supplied by an ECMAScript implementation

....

#### 4.4.31 Symbol value

primitive value that represents a unique, non-String Object property key

## 5. Notational Conventions 符号约定

...

## 6. ECMAScript Data Types and Values ECMA 数据类型和值

### 6.1 ECMAScript language types

Undefined,Null,Boolean,String,Symbol,Number,BigInt,Object

#### 6.1.1 the Undefined type

::: tip 原文
Any variable that has not been assigned a value has the value undefined.
:::

#### 6.1.2 the null type

just null

#### 6.1.3 the boolean type

#### 6.1.4 the string type

::: tip 摘抄
The String type is generally used to represent textual data in a running ECMAScript program, in which case each element in the String is treated as a UTF-16 code unit value.
:::

##### - the function String.prototypr.normalize can be used to explicitly normalize a String value.

参数<br/>
NFC — Normalization Form Canonical Composition.<br/>
NFD — Normalization Form Canonical Decomposition.<br/>
NFKC — Normalization Form Compatibility Composition.<br/>
NFKD — Normalization Form Compatibility Decomposition.<br/>

compatibility 兼容性 canonical规范性<br/>
composition合并 decomposition分解<br/>
<p class="tip-aqua">
'n\u0303'.normalize('NFC') === {{'n\u0303'.normalize('NFC')}}<br/>
'n\u0303'.normalize('NFD') === {{'n\u0303'.normalize('NFC')}}
</p>

<p class="no-wrap">Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'L̠ͨͧͩ͘L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'L̠ͨͧͩ͘L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'L̠ͨͧͩ͘L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́'Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍A̴̵̜̰͔ͫ͗͢L̠ͨͧͩ͘Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘G̴̻͈͍͔̹̑͗̎̅͛́Ǫ̵̹̻̝̳͂̌̌͘!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞'Z͑ͫ̓ͪ̂ͫ̽͏̴̙̤̞͉͚̯̞̠͍!͖̬̰̙̗̿̋ͥͥ̂ͣ̐́́͜͞</p>


##### 6.1.4.1 StringIndexOf

::: tip 解释
The abstract operation StringIndexOf takes arguments string (a String), searchValue (a String), and fromIndex (a nonnegative
integer). It performs the following steps when called:<br/>
1. Assert: Type(string) is String.<br/>
2. Assert: Type(searchValue) is String.<br/>
3. Assert: fromIndex is a non-negative integer.<br/>
4. Let len be the length of string.<br/>
5. If searchValue is the empty String and fromIndex ≤ len, return fromIndex.<br/>
6. Let searchLen be the length of searchValue.<br/>
7. For each integer i starting with fromIndex such that i ≤ len - searchLen, in ascending order, do<br/>
a. Let candidate be the substring of string from i to i + searchLen.<br/>
b. If candidate is the same sequence of code units as searchValue, return i.<br/>
8. Return -1.
:::


#### 6.1.5 the Symbol type
::: tip about
the Symbol type is the set of all non-String values that may be used as the key of Object property.
:::

<ClientOnly>
<ecmaSymbolDemo ecmaPractice="demo1_1"></ecmaSymbolDemo>
</ClientOnly>

##### 6.1.5.1 well-know symbol

<ClientOnly>
<ecmaSymbolDemo ecmaPractice="demo1_2"></ecmaSymbolDemo>
</ClientOnly>

| name | description  | value and purpose |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  @@asyncIterator     |       Symbol.asyncIterator        |        a method that returns the default [AsyncIterator](#async-iteration异步遍历) for an object . Called by the semantics of the for-await-of statement          |





##### async iteration异步遍历



